# Datos de publicación
## Volumen
Vol. VI

## Fecha
Julio 1959-Junio 1960

## Número
Nro.  21-24

## Notas
-

## Link de Publicación original
http://economica.econo.unlp.edu.ar/detalle-numero-anterior.php?param=106


# Artículos




## Título
Sociología de la urbe

## Idioma
Español

## Link a Artículo original
http://economica.econo.unlp.edu.ar/resumen-articulo.php?param=106&param2=536

## Artículo en HTML+Wordpress:
```
[vc_row] [vc_column] [vc_column_text]<span style="color: #800000;">Elisabeth Pfeil</span>[/vc_column_text][vc_empty_space height="10px"][vc_btn title="Descargar Documento" style="custom" custom_background="#821211" custom_text="#ffffff" size="xs" i_icon_fontawesome="fa fa-file-pdf-o" add_icon="true" link="url:%2Fwp%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F20090408041417PM_Economica_56.pdf||target:%20_blank"][vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657308968{margin-bottom: -10px !important;}"]<!--more-->[vc_separator][dt-space height="5"][vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657903337{margin-top: 10px !important;}"]<strong>Cita del artículo</strong>[/vc_column_text][vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1512103511990{margin-top: 10px !important;margin-bottom: 0px !important;}"]Pfeil, Elisabeth (1960). “Sociología de la urbe”. Económica, Vol. VI(21-24): 3-40.[/vc_column_text][vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657909042{margin-top: 10px !important;}"]<strong>Abstract</strong>[/vc_column_text][vc_column_text]<p style="text-align: justify;">Analysing different aspects of city life during the lapse between the last quarter of last century and our days, the author points out as a remarkable feature, the unsteadiness with which men and professions are joint, upon the basis of competence and affinity, in it, stating the necessity of satisfactorily exploring the social consequences of that unsteadiness; the author also describes the situations of anonymousness and strangeness through which every new member of a large city goes, and with the example of a family illustrates the points of view and proceedings of its members with regard to neighbourhood relationship, social circle and politic and church community.Then the author devotes to urban dwelling, to end with a chapter on urban planning recommending the sociologic approach to this type of investigations. Town must be considered, not individually, but in its functional connection with the boundary, with the region, as a component of a balanced hierarchy.</p>[/vc_column_text][vc_empty_space height="10px"][/vc_column][/vc_row]

```

***












## Título
Economía y espacio: las estructuras intrarregionales

## Idioma
Español

## Link a Artículo original
http://economica.econo.unlp.edu.ar/resumen-articulo.php?param=106&param2=537

## Artículo en HTML+Wordpress:
```
[vc_row] [vc_column] [vc_column_text]<span style="color: #800000;">Claude Ponsard</span>[/vc_column_text][vc_empty_space height="10px"][vc_btn title="Descargar Documento" style="custom" custom_background="#821211" custom_text="#ffffff" size="xs" i_icon_fontawesome="fa fa-file-pdf-o" add_icon="true" link="url:%2Fwp%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F20090408041501PM_Economica_57.pdf||target:%20_blank"][vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657308968{margin-bottom: -10px !important;}"]<!--more-->[vc_separator][dt-space height="5"][vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657903337{margin-top: 10px !important;}"]<strong>Cita del artículo</strong>[/vc_column_text][vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1512103511990{margin-top: 10px !important;margin-bottom: 0px !important;}"]Ponsard, Claude (1960). “Economía y espacio: las estructuras intrarregionales”. Económica, Vol. VI(21-24): 41-54.[/vc_column_text][vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657909042{margin-top: 10px !important;}"]<strong>Abstract</strong>[/vc_column_text][vc_column_text]<p style="text-align: justify;">The study of all macroeconomic reality needs a previous analysis of its internal structure. To that end, it is necessary to analyse urban economy, location and dimension of cities, urban conglomerates and their unilateral and multilateral bearing. To define the optimum of cities dimensions, it is necessary to analyse urban structure concentric sectors or zones and their respective influence areas, confirming REILLY's statement: when the distance between big and small cities increases, attraction forces of little towns are enlarged.</p>[/vc_column_text][vc_empty_space height="10px"][/vc_column][/vc_row]

```

***












## Título
Ideas para una tipología regional

## Idioma
Español

## Link a Artículo original
http://economica.econo.unlp.edu.ar/resumen-articulo.php?param=106&param2=538

## Artículo en HTML+Wordpress:
```
[vc_row] [vc_column] [vc_column_text]<span style="color: #800000;">Oreste Popescu</span>[/vc_column_text][vc_empty_space height="10px"][vc_btn title="Descargar Documento" style="custom" custom_background="#821211" custom_text="#ffffff" size="xs" i_icon_fontawesome="fa fa-file-pdf-o" add_icon="true" link="url:%2Fwp%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F20090408041541PM_Economica_58.pdf||target:%20_blank"][vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657308968{margin-bottom: -10px !important;}"]<!--more-->[vc_separator][dt-space height="5"][vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657903337{margin-top: 10px !important;}"]<strong>Cita del artículo</strong>[/vc_column_text][vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1512103511990{margin-top: 10px !important;margin-bottom: 0px !important;}"]Popescu, Oreste (1960). “Ideas para una tipología regional”. Económica, Vol. VI(21-24): 55-63.[/vc_column_text][vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657909042{margin-top: 10px !important;}"]<strong>Abstract</strong>[/vc_column_text][vc_column_text]<p style="text-align: justify;">The most adequate starting point to build up a space economy typology is the idea of region. In opposition to the prevailing point of view, that is the impossibility of determining the space economy unit, the author proposes to define region as a function of the economic system, in the sombartian sense, as an harmonic way of economic life distinguished by a spirit, constitution and economic technique.Therefore, regional typology would not be other than a variation of the general economic typology. In a previous approach, ideal regional types should be established, to go on afterwards with the working up of real regional types as well as the impure real forms. In a third stage it would be necessary to proceed with a dynamic typologic approach for specific ends (for instance a regional typology for joining objects, or other with the aim of economic development) or distinguish between functional character regional types and structural character ones.</p>[/vc_column_text][vc_empty_space height="10px"][/vc_column][/vc_row]

```

***












## Título
El trend del centro de gravitación del área del maní en la República Argentina

## Idioma
Español

## Link a Artículo original
http://economica.econo.unlp.edu.ar/resumen-articulo.php?param=106&param2=539

## Artículo en HTML+Wordpress:
```
[vc_row] [vc_column] [vc_column_text]<span style="color: #800000;">Oreste Popescu</span>[/vc_column_text][vc_empty_space height="10px"][vc_btn title="Descargar Documento" style="custom" custom_background="#821211" custom_text="#ffffff" size="xs" i_icon_fontawesome="fa fa-file-pdf-o" add_icon="true" link="url:%2Fwp%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F20090408041619PM_Economica_59.pdf||target:%20_blank"][vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657308968{margin-bottom: -10px !important;}"]<!--more-->[vc_separator][dt-space height="5"][vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657903337{margin-top: 10px !important;}"]<strong>Cita del artículo</strong>[/vc_column_text][vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1512103511990{margin-top: 10px !important;margin-bottom: 0px !important;}"]Popescu, Oreste (1960). “El trend del centro de gravitación del área del maní en la República Argentina”. Económica, Vol. VI(21-24): 65-84.[/vc_column_text][vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657909042{margin-top: 10px !important;}"]<strong>Abstract</strong>[/vc_column_text][vc_column_text]<p style="text-align: justify;">It is feasible to determine the trend of displacement of peanut farming, from origin zone to that considered optimum. For that purpose, the author employs an adequate consequent method which allows him to appreciate it in its different stages. He starts by locating that zone considered as original for peanut, northeastern zone, and demonstrates how it is displacing itself to center east, due to economic reasons; mainly to peanut application for industrial use. The space of domain is not definitive since for new factors, principally that of peanut substitution with oleaginous crops of larger yielding which makes its cultivation be shifted to the center of the country, Córdoba. Here, concentration of optimum factors of space economy permit its immovability be foreseen.The bibliographic contribution is a very important one.</p>[/vc_column_text][vc_empty_space height="10px"][/vc_column][/vc_row]

```

***












## Título
La posición del problema de la localización dentro de la teoría económica

## Idioma
Español

## Link a Artículo original
http://economica.econo.unlp.edu.ar/resumen-articulo.php?param=106&param2=540

## Artículo en HTML+Wordpress:
```
[vc_row] [vc_column] [vc_column_text]<span style="color: #800000;">Andreas Predöhl</span>[/vc_column_text][vc_empty_space height="10px"][vc_btn title="Descargar Documento" style="custom" custom_background="#821211" custom_text="#ffffff" size="xs" i_icon_fontawesome="fa fa-file-pdf-o" add_icon="true" link="url:%2Fwp%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F20090408041703PM_Economica_60.pdf||target:%20_blank"][vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657308968{margin-bottom: -10px !important;}"]<!--more-->[vc_separator][dt-space height="5"][vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657903337{margin-top: 10px !important;}"]<strong>Cita del artículo</strong>[/vc_column_text][vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1512103511990{margin-top: 10px !important;margin-bottom: 0px !important;}"]Predöhl, Andreas (1960). “La posición del problema de la localización dentro de la teoría económica”. Económica, Vol. VI(21-24): 85-113.[/vc_column_text][vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657909042{margin-top: 10px !important;}"]<strong>Abstract</strong>[/vc_column_text][vc_column_text]<p style="text-align: justify;">The author points out that the theory of agricultural of THÜNEN, industrial of WEBER, as well as the great number of investigations that have enriched the studies on if developed in every aspect, are nevertheless disconnected from general economic theory.In view of such situation, he determines that this connection is constituted by the substitution principle, which according to MARSHALL and CASSEL, actuates in the meaning that a production may obtain the less expensive continuation of factors. According to the author, there is specific case of substitution. To set up the optimum substitution points of such means of production sensible to a change of production must be found. Then it is complemented with geographical surface complications, extraeconomic factors and different forms of in diverse branches of economic activities.</p>[/vc_column_text][vc_empty_space height="10px"][/vc_column][/vc_row]

```

***












## Título
El espacio agrícola

## Idioma
Español

## Link a Artículo original
http://economica.econo.unlp.edu.ar/resumen-articulo.php?param=106&param2=541

## Artículo en HTML+Wordpress:
```
[vc_row] [vc_column] [vc_column_text]<span style="color: #800000;">Andrés Ringuelet</span>[/vc_column_text][vc_empty_space height="10px"][vc_btn title="Descargar Documento" style="custom" custom_background="#821211" custom_text="#ffffff" size="xs" i_icon_fontawesome="fa fa-file-pdf-o" add_icon="true" link="url:%2Fwp%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F20090408041759PM_Economica_61.pdf||target:%20_blank"][vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657308968{margin-bottom: -10px !important;}"]<!--more-->[vc_separator][dt-space height="5"][vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657903337{margin-top: 10px !important;}"]<strong>Cita del artículo</strong>[/vc_column_text][vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1512103511990{margin-top: 10px !important;margin-bottom: 0px !important;}"]Ringuelet, Andrés (1960). “El espacio agrícola”. Económica, Vol. VI(21-24): 115-130.[/vc_column_text][vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657909042{margin-top: 10px !important;}"]<strong>Abstract</strong>[/vc_column_text][vc_column_text]<p style="text-align: justify;">Agricultural space is defined and determined in regard of natural, technical, economic and social deeds.The geographical aspect comprises soil types, topography, water distribution, eliminate flora and fauna; it determines "natural regions".The technical aspect comprises physical, chemical and biological qualities of soil, edaphological features, exploitation branches, tillage labour, soil management, agricultural phenology, rains rules, frost defence, cultivated elements and domestic species, vegetal and animal ecology. It determinates "agricultural zones".The economic aspect includes land possession, its placing, valuation, production cost, efficiency, agricultural enterprise organization; it forms the "agricultural economic units".The social aspect concerns to land usage study, influence of ambient on man, human integration and distribution, social elements, social ecology; it qualifies the type, class or form of an existing community.</p>[/vc_column_text][vc_empty_space height="10px"][/vc_column][/vc_row]

```

***












## Título
El paralelo 42º y la frontera entre las áreas norte y sud del espacio económico argentino

## Idioma
Español

## Link a Artículo original
http://economica.econo.unlp.edu.ar/resumen-articulo.php?param=106&param2=542

## Artículo en HTML+Wordpress:
```
[vc_row] [vc_column] [vc_column_text]<span style="color: #800000;">Benigno Rodríguez Meitín</span>[/vc_column_text][vc_empty_space height="10px"][vc_btn title="Descargar Documento" style="custom" custom_background="#821211" custom_text="#ffffff" size="xs" i_icon_fontawesome="fa fa-file-pdf-o" add_icon="true" link="url:%2Fwp%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F20090408041851PM_Economica_62.pdf||target:%20_blank"][vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657308968{margin-bottom: -10px !important;}"]<!--more-->[vc_separator][dt-space height="5"][vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657903337{margin-top: 10px !important;}"]<strong>Cita del artículo</strong>[/vc_column_text][vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1512103511990{margin-top: 10px !important;margin-bottom: 0px !important;}"]Rodríguez Meitín, Benigno (1960). “El paralelo 42º y la frontera entre las áreas norte y sud del espacio económico argentino”. Económica, Vol. VI(21-24): 131-163.[/vc_column_text][vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657909042{margin-top: 10px !important;}"]<strong>Abstract</strong>[/vc_column_text][vc_column_text]<p style="text-align: justify;">Our country offers two large development areas: Northern area, which has developed itself in answer to foreign market demand, with its center located at Buenos Aires port, with reference to which are analyzed attempts of division by BUNGE, LLORENS and GARCÍA MATA, MOYANO LLERENA, MARCENARO and LLORENS. Southern area, a group of spaces almost parallel, cordillera to sea, ordinate by the transversal disposition of valleys, rivers, mountains, railways, and roads, ordination that confirms the opinions of former Minister RAMOS MEXIA, General SAROBE and the geographer and naturalist FRENGUELLI, CABRERA and FERUGLIO.Once reviewed the existing elements on political limits, geographical borders, fitogoegraphical boundaries, ecological edges, it is established the economic frontier through the final ends of railway traffic, in km. 215 at the northwestern end at the south of Mendoza, crossing the northwest of La Pampa and Bahía Blanca at the southeastern edge.</p>[/vc_column_text][vc_empty_space height="10px"][/vc_column][/vc_row]

```

***












## Título
Villa del Cerro. Estudio de los factores influyentes en los valores de la tierra

## Idioma
Español

## Link a Artículo original
http://economica.econo.unlp.edu.ar/resumen-articulo.php?param=106&param2=543

## Artículo en HTML+Wordpress:
```
[vc_row] [vc_column] [vc_column_text]<span style="color: #800000;">Cristina Andersen Santamarina y  Miguel Petit Ayala</span>[/vc_column_text][vc_empty_space height="10px"][vc_btn title="Descargar Documento" style="custom" custom_background="#821211" custom_text="#ffffff" size="xs" i_icon_fontawesome="fa fa-file-pdf-o" add_icon="true" link="url:%2Fwp%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F20090408041945PM_Economica_63.pdf||target:%20_blank"][vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657308968{margin-bottom: -10px !important;}"]<!--more-->[vc_separator][dt-space height="5"][vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657903337{margin-top: 10px !important;}"]<strong>Cita del artículo</strong>[/vc_column_text][vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1512103511990{margin-top: 10px !important;margin-bottom: 0px !important;}"]Andersen Santamarina, Cristina y Miguel Petit Ayala (1960). “Villa del Cerro. Estudio de los factores influyentes en los valores de la tierra”. Económica, Vol. VI(21-24): 165-175.[/vc_column_text][vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657909042{margin-top: 10px !important;}"]<strong>Abstract</strong>[/vc_column_text][vc_column_text]<p style="text-align: justify;">Photo-interpretation is the technique of stereoscopic observation of air photograph in which natural and artificial focuses appear evident. The photographic reading acknowledges them and photographic analysis classifies and interrelates them, translating common features of different facts into the drawn up models or patterns.The photographic interpretation integrates elements belonging to reading and analyzing, elaborating them in function of interpretation criteria and by means of an inductive-deductive evaluation gets to the inference of facts not registered themselves in the photographic picture. This technique that came up to an elevate technical and methodical development during the second world war, is essential to this kind of studies.Afterwards, the authors state the advantages obtained on applying this technique in the zone of Villa Cerro de Montevideo, recommending its application in a big scale.</p>[/vc_column_text][vc_empty_space height="10px"][/vc_column][/vc_row]

```

***












## Título
La teoría económica espacial

## Idioma
Español

## Link a Artículo original
http://economica.econo.unlp.edu.ar/resumen-articulo.php?param=106&param2=544

## Artículo en HTML+Wordpress:
```
[vc_row] [vc_column] [vc_column_text]<span style="color: #800000;">Gerhard Stavenhagen</span>[/vc_column_text][vc_empty_space height="10px"][vc_btn title="Descargar Documento" style="custom" custom_background="#821211" custom_text="#ffffff" size="xs" i_icon_fontawesome="fa fa-file-pdf-o" add_icon="true" link="url:%2Fwp%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F20090408042023PM_Economica_64.pdf||target:%20_blank"][vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657308968{margin-bottom: -10px !important;}"]<!--more-->[vc_separator][dt-space height="5"][vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657903337{margin-top: 10px !important;}"]<strong>Cita del artículo</strong>[/vc_column_text][vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1512103511990{margin-top: 10px !important;margin-bottom: 0px !important;}"]Stavenhagen, Gerhard (1960). “La teoría económica espacial”. Económica, Vol. VI(21-24): 177-201.[/vc_column_text][vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657909042{margin-top: 10px !important;}"]<strong>Abstract</strong>[/vc_column_text][vc_column_text]<p style="text-align: justify;">The starting point of space economics studies is the location theory, created by THÜNEN (and completed by BRINKMANN) in the agricultural field and by WEBER in the industrial one, which was developed in isolation, just by the economic general theory.Further investigations extended initial perspectives, and so we have the contribution and theories of ROSCHER, SCHAFFLE, LAUNHARDT, SOMBART, GOTHEIN, ENGLANDER, PREDÜHL, CASEEI, RISTUHL, OHLIN, WEIGMANN, PALANDER and LÖSCH, whose conclusions form the present scope of space economic theory which, as an inseparable part of the whole economic theory, includes the problems of international trade.</p>[/vc_column_text][vc_empty_space height="10px"][/vc_column][/vc_row]

```

***












## Título
La teoría económica espacial y los principios de la política económica regional

## Idioma
Español

## Link a Artículo original
http://economica.econo.unlp.edu.ar/resumen-articulo.php?param=106&param2=545

## Artículo en HTML+Wordpress:
```
[vc_row] [vc_column] [vc_column_text]<span style="color: #800000;">Francesco Vito</span>[/vc_column_text][vc_empty_space height="10px"][vc_btn title="Descargar Documento" style="custom" custom_background="#821211" custom_text="#ffffff" size="xs" i_icon_fontawesome="fa fa-file-pdf-o" add_icon="true" link="url:%2Fwp%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F20090408042106PM_Economica_65.pdf||target:%20_blank"][vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657308968{margin-bottom: -10px !important;}"]<!--more-->[vc_separator][dt-space height="5"][vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657903337{margin-top: 10px !important;}"]<strong>Cita del artículo</strong>[/vc_column_text][vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1512103511990{margin-top: 10px !important;margin-bottom: 0px !important;}"]Vito, Francesco (1960). “La teoría económica espacial y los principios de la política económica regional”. Económica, Vol. VI(21-24): 203-220.[/vc_column_text][vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657909042{margin-top: 10px !important;}"]<strong>Abstract</strong>[/vc_column_text][vc_column_text]<p style="text-align: justify;">After propounding the denominations of backward, subdeveloped and depressed economy, respectively, the author outlines broadly the evolution of spaces studies, scientific principles to be applied for the delimitation of the region, points out factors to be considered according to the case and circumstances, in order to determine regional inequalities and the principles of regional policy applicable for the possible solution of each case, taking as reference zones those of N.W. S.W. of France (depressed zone) and south of Italy (underdeveloped zone).</p>[/vc_column_text][vc_empty_space height="10px"][/vc_column][/vc_row]

```

***










