# Datos de publicación
## Volumen
Vol. V

## Fecha
Julio 1958 - Junio 1959

## Número
Nro.  17-20

## Notas
-

## Link de Publicación original
http://economica.econo.unlp.edu.ar/detalle-numero-anterior.php?param=108


# Artículos




## Título
El enfoque espacial en la Economía Política

## Idioma
Español

## Link a Artículo original
http://economica.econo.unlp.edu.ar/resumen-articulo.php?param=108&param2=546

## Artículo en HTML+Wordpress:
```
[vc_row] [vc_column]
    [vc_column_text]
      <span style="color: #800000;">Oreste Popescu</span>
    [/vc_column_text]

    [vc_empty_space height="10px"]

    [vc_btn title="Descargar Documento" style="custom" custom_background="#821211" custom_text="#ffffff" size="xs" i_icon_fontawesome="fa fa-file-pdf-o" add_icon="true" link="url:http://economica.econo.unlp.edu.ar/20090408042400PM_Economica_44.pdf||target:%20_blank"]

    [vc_separator]

    [dt-space height="10"]

    
      [vc_column_text]
        <strong>Cita del artículo</strong>
      [/vc_column_text]

      [vc_column_text]Popescu, Oreste (1959). “El enfoque espacial en la Economía Política”. Económica, Vol. V(17-20): 3-13.[/vc_column_text]

    
    
    
      [vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657909042{margin-top: 10px !important;}"]
        <strong>Abstract</strong>
      [/vc_column_text]

      [vc_column_text]
        <p style="text-align: justify;">After a brief introduction dealing in big lines with the economic thought of the classical and neo-classical schools the author proceeds to analyses the progress achieved in the last 25 years. The first important progress was the construction of the market morphology followed by the macroeconomic approach culminating in KEYNES works, by LEONTIEF'S input-output model, the operational research, the linear programming and the theory of games. Another fundamental progress was achieved by considering time, both in the short run (business cycles) and the long run (economic growth) which occupies at present a central position in the scientific discussion. Finally, the recent intent to improve the one point economic model led to the spatial approach. Thus one can say that modern economic thought developed in three big directions: the first one is formed by the study of the substance of economic phenomena, the second considers time and the third includes space in its approach to economics.</p>
      [/vc_column_text]

    
    
  [/vc_column]
[/vc_row]

```

***












## Título
Agricultura y desarrollo económico

## Idioma
Español

## Link a Artículo original
http://economica.econo.unlp.edu.ar/resumen-articulo.php?param=108&param2=547

## Artículo en HTML+Wordpress:
```
[vc_row] [vc_column]
    [vc_column_text]
      <span style="color: #800000;">Aldo A. Arnaudo</span>
    [/vc_column_text]

    [vc_empty_space height="10px"]

    [vc_btn title="Descargar Documento" style="custom" custom_background="#821211" custom_text="#ffffff" size="xs" i_icon_fontawesome="fa fa-file-pdf-o" add_icon="true" link="url:http://economica.econo.unlp.edu.ar/20090408042442PM_Economica_45.pdf||target:%20_blank"]

    [vc_separator]

    [dt-space height="10"]

    
      [vc_column_text]
        <strong>Cita del artículo</strong>
      [/vc_column_text]

      [vc_column_text]Arnaudo, Aldo A. (1959). “Agricultura y desarrollo económico”. Económica, Vol. V(17-20): 15-36.[/vc_column_text]

    
    
    
      [vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657909042{margin-top: 10px !important;}"]
        <strong>Abstract</strong>
      [/vc_column_text]

      [vc_column_text]
        <p style="text-align: justify;">From a simple observation of data it arises that when bigger the "per capita" income of a nation is, lesser the participation of agricultural section will be, in national product. Consequently, underdeveloped countries must apply to industrialization to secure its growth.Industry must act as an absorption element of human resources and savings for a new investment. The fundamental question is to know up to what degree should industrialization be supported, and which is the most economic value for agricultural production volume.The problem's knot is the increase of produce per occupied person. The more efficient distribution of resources, would be that in which medium productivity per occupied person be the same in every sector of production.Attached to this statement, it is necessary to establish some requirements for the system of prices, the deepest question being that of the determination of national production prices, in front of the complications in the matter of exchanges.</p>
      [/vc_column_text]

    
    
  [/vc_column]
[/vc_row]

```

***












## Título
Producto bruto de la provincia de Córdoba. Año 1957

## Idioma
Español

## Link a Artículo original
http://economica.econo.unlp.edu.ar/resumen-articulo.php?param=108&param2=548

## Artículo en HTML+Wordpress:
```
[vc_row] [vc_column]
    [vc_column_text]
      <span style="color: #800000;">Aldo A. Arnaudo y otros</span>
    [/vc_column_text]

    [vc_empty_space height="10px"]

    [vc_btn title="Descargar Documento" style="custom" custom_background="#821211" custom_text="#ffffff" size="xs" i_icon_fontawesome="fa fa-file-pdf-o" add_icon="true" link="url:http://economica.econo.unlp.edu.ar/20090408042623PM_Economica_46.pdf||target:%20_blank"]

    [vc_separator]

    [dt-space height="10"]

    
      [vc_column_text]
        <strong>Cita del artículo</strong>
      [/vc_column_text]

      [vc_column_text]Arnaudo y otros, Aldo A. (1959). “Producto bruto de la provincia de Córdoba. Año 1957”. Económica, Vol. V(17-20): 37-50.[/vc_column_text]

    
    
    
      [vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657909042{margin-top: 10px !important;}"]
        <strong>Abstract</strong>
      [/vc_column_text]

      [vc_column_text]
        <p style="text-align: justify;">The Instituto de Economía y Finanzas de la Facultad de Ciencias Económicas (Universidad Nacional de Córdoba) intended to determine the Province participation in the begetting of nacional product.The representative sum of the product belonging to the Province as for 1957, was obtained by means of the addition of the values incorporated by the different economic sectors, considering the classification and systematics used for the calculation of national income carried out by the Departamento de Investigaciones Económicas del Banco Central of the Republic, not only for practical reasons possibility of getting ciphers comparable with national- totals but methodological ones more steady and concrete information, warning the authors about the existence of an admissible margin of error in this type of studies.</p>
      [/vc_column_text]

    
    
  [/vc_column]
[/vc_row]

```

***












## Título
La región económica

## Idioma
Español

## Link a Artículo original
http://economica.econo.unlp.edu.ar/resumen-articulo.php?param=108&param2=549

## Artículo en HTML+Wordpress:
```
[vc_row] [vc_column]
    [vc_column_text]
      <span style="color: #800000;">Jacques R. Boudeville</span>
    [/vc_column_text]

    [vc_empty_space height="10px"]

    [vc_btn title="Descargar Documento" style="custom" custom_background="#821211" custom_text="#ffffff" size="xs" i_icon_fontawesome="fa fa-file-pdf-o" add_icon="true" link="url:http://economica.econo.unlp.edu.ar/20090408042703PM_Economica_47.pdf||target:%20_blank"]

    [vc_separator]

    [dt-space height="10"]

    
      [vc_column_text]
        <strong>Cita del artículo</strong>
      [/vc_column_text]

      [vc_column_text]Boudeville, Jacques R. (1959). “La región económica”. Económica, Vol. V(17-20): 51-157.[/vc_column_text]

    
    
    
      [vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657909042{margin-top: 10px !important;}"]
        <strong>Abstract</strong>
      [/vc_column_text]

      [vc_column_text]
        <p style="text-align: justify;">The author exposes Concepts, principles and methods of regional investigation and, principally, its operational aspect. He treats the methods of analysis of a determined region and those fore ordained to obtain individual and collective cooperation as regards to development and safeguard of resources of the whole region.He duly makes clear the conception of a decentralized and coordinated planification, all with the aim of making the panorama clear and being a guide to those who might be interested in a cooperative effort, destined to extend and coordinate regional activities in both, technical and practical aspects.</p>
      [/vc_column_text]

    
    
  [/vc_column]
[/vc_row]

```

***












## Título
El área urbana

## Idioma
Español

## Link a Artículo original
http://economica.econo.unlp.edu.ar/resumen-articulo.php?param=108&param2=550

## Artículo en HTML+Wordpress:
```
[vc_row] [vc_column]
    [vc_column_text]
      <span style="color: #800000;">José María Dagnino Pastore</span>
    [/vc_column_text]

    [vc_empty_space height="10px"]

    [vc_btn title="Descargar Documento" style="custom" custom_background="#821211" custom_text="#ffffff" size="xs" i_icon_fontawesome="fa fa-file-pdf-o" add_icon="true" link="url:http://economica.econo.unlp.edu.ar/20090408042746PM_Economica_48.pdf||target:%20_blank"]

    [vc_separator]

    [dt-space height="10"]

    
      [vc_column_text]
        <strong>Cita del artículo</strong>
      [/vc_column_text]

      [vc_column_text]Dagnino Pastore, José María (1959). “El área urbana”. Económica, Vol. V(17-20): 159-179.[/vc_column_text]

    
    
    
      [vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657909042{margin-top: 10px !important;}"]
        <strong>Abstract</strong>
      [/vc_column_text]

      [vc_column_text]
        <p style="text-align: justify;">The raised issue is that of populated area limit determination. As this is not a datum but an unknown thing, it must be established "a posteriori". After analyzing a series of criterion, the author lays them aside as insufficient propounding as a solution that of a minimum density inside a minimum surface.The concept of uniformity of measurement, which may be situated among any of the following geometric figures: triangle, square, or hexagon, equilateral. Urban area and population characteristics determination, comes from map representation of density of each measurement unit.Though his contribution has a quantitative point of view, he makes clear that for special studies the existence of imponderable, qualitative elements can't be ignored.</p>
      [/vc_column_text]

    
    
  [/vc_column]
[/vc_row]

```

***












## Título
El crecimiento de la ciudad de México: causas y efectos económicos

## Idioma
Español

## Link a Artículo original
http://economica.econo.unlp.edu.ar/resumen-articulo.php?param=108&param2=552

## Artículo en HTML+Wordpress:
```
[vc_row] [vc_column]
    [vc_column_text]
      <span style="color: #800000;">Edmundo Flores</span>
    [/vc_column_text]

    [vc_empty_space height="10px"]

    [vc_btn title="Descargar Documento" style="custom" custom_background="#821211" custom_text="#ffffff" size="xs" i_icon_fontawesome="fa fa-file-pdf-o" add_icon="true" link="url:http://economica.econo.unlp.edu.ar/20090408042904PM_Economica_50.pdf||target:%20_blank"]

    [vc_separator]

    [dt-space height="10"]

    
      [vc_column_text]
        <strong>Cita del artículo</strong>
      [/vc_column_text]

      [vc_column_text]Flores, Edmundo (1959). “El crecimiento de la ciudad de México: causas y efectos económicos”. Económica, Vol. V(17-20): 181-212.[/vc_column_text]

    
    
    
      [vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657909042{margin-top: 10px !important;}"]
        <strong>Abstract</strong>
      [/vc_column_text]

      [vc_column_text]
        <p style="text-align: justify;">Attraction and dispersion forces actuate on urban growth. Attraction forces for rural population on its influence zone which constitutes the main part of demographic increase; dispersion forces on certain groups, extending building area to periphery.High density of population is pointed out as one of the advantages. Among the advantages of an elevated density of population, a characteristic of cities, it is pointed out by the author, that of reducing transport and communication cost to the minimum, of granting access to qualified workmanship and technical specialized services, securing local and nation all market in a big scale.The possibility of lessening its disadvantages depends on the interest and ability of the social group to obtain that economic development benefits the whole community.The author, explaining minutely the growth of Mexico city, considers that its control could be carried out by regulating intensity of attraction and repulsion agents by means of planned regional investment.</p>
      [/vc_column_text]

    
    
  [/vc_column]
[/vc_row]

```

***












## Título
La localización de la agricultura y los cambios del uso de la tierra en México

## Idioma
Español

## Link a Artículo original
http://economica.econo.unlp.edu.ar/resumen-articulo.php?param=108&param2=551

## Artículo en HTML+Wordpress:
```
[vc_row] [vc_column]
    [vc_column_text]
      <span style="color: #800000;">Edmundo Flores</span>
    [/vc_column_text]

    [vc_empty_space height="10px"]

    [vc_btn title="Descargar Documento" style="custom" custom_background="#821211" custom_text="#ffffff" size="xs" i_icon_fontawesome="fa fa-file-pdf-o" add_icon="true" link="url:http://economica.econo.unlp.edu.ar/20090408042826PM_Economica_49.pdf||target:%20_blank"]

    [vc_separator]

    [dt-space height="10"]

    
      [vc_column_text]
        <strong>Cita del artículo</strong>
      [/vc_column_text]

      [vc_column_text]Flores, Edmundo (1959). “La localización de la agricultura y los cambios del uso de la tierra en México”. Económica, Vol. V(17-20): 213-238.[/vc_column_text]

    
    
    
      [vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657909042{margin-top: 10px !important;}"]
        <strong>Abstract</strong>
      [/vc_column_text]

      [vc_column_text]
        <p style="text-align: justify;">Once the revolution was attained and agrarian reform set up, it was necessary to increase and diversify the production of food and raw materials to satisfy the demand that came to unknown levels as a result of urban growth and recent industrial development.Lands surrounding the metropolitan zone were submitted to more intensive uses and roads and dams, extending to the periphery, incorporated large zones to the "hinterland" of the central metropolitan region.Marking that the increase of agricultural produce was due to joined and cumulative effects of social institutional, economic and technical reformation, the author considers that the cumulative character of economic development which acquires more impulse as it going its way- makes believe that as well as better techniques are adopted, a largest rate will grow, driving away all the agricultural limitations that refrain mexican economic development.</p>
      [/vc_column_text]

    
    
  [/vc_column]
[/vc_row]

```

***












## Título
El espacio como magnitud econométrica: valoración del espacio

## Idioma
Español

## Link a Artículo original
http://economica.econo.unlp.edu.ar/resumen-articulo.php?param=108&param2=553

## Artículo en HTML+Wordpress:
```
[vc_row] [vc_column]
    [vc_column_text]
      <span style="color: #800000;">Eduardo M. Gálvez Laguarta</span>
    [/vc_column_text]

    [vc_empty_space height="10px"]

    [vc_btn title="Descargar Documento" style="custom" custom_background="#821211" custom_text="#ffffff" size="xs" i_icon_fontawesome="fa fa-file-pdf-o" add_icon="true" link="url:http://economica.econo.unlp.edu.ar/20090408042945PM_Economica_51.pdf||target:%20_blank"]

    [vc_separator]

    [dt-space height="10"]

    
      [vc_column_text]
        <strong>Cita del artículo</strong>
      [/vc_column_text]

      [vc_column_text]Gálvez Laguarta, Eduardo M. (1959). “El espacio como magnitud econométrica: valoración del espacio”. Económica, Vol. V(17-20): 239-244.[/vc_column_text]

    
    
    
      [vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657909042{margin-top: 10px !important;}"]
        <strong>Abstract</strong>
      [/vc_column_text]

      [vc_column_text]
        <p style="text-align: justify;">In first part of the work, it is intended to leave the difference between value and space value, well set up.The latter is analyzed as a magnitude, it is classified and specified a space value, its dimension is considered and so are the concepts of cardinal and ordinal space, to end with the determination of the concept of value of the space, the price, and the difference between concrete and concreting space.</p>
      [/vc_column_text]

    
    
  [/vc_column]
[/vc_row]

```

***












## Título
Contribución a una política económica urbana.

## Idioma
Español

## Link a Artículo original
http://economica.econo.unlp.edu.ar/resumen-articulo.php?param=108&param2=554

## Artículo en HTML+Wordpress:
```
[vc_row] [vc_column]
    [vc_column_text]
      <span style="color: #800000;">Ernesto La Padula</span>
    [/vc_column_text]

    [vc_empty_space height="10px"]

    [vc_btn title="Descargar Documento" style="custom" custom_background="#821211" custom_text="#ffffff" size="xs" i_icon_fontawesome="fa fa-file-pdf-o" add_icon="true" link="url:http://economica.econo.unlp.edu.ar/20090408043031PM_Economica_52.pdf||target:%20_blank"]

    [vc_separator]

    [dt-space height="10"]

    
      [vc_column_text]
        <strong>Cita del artículo</strong>
      [/vc_column_text]

      [vc_column_text]La Padula, Ernesto (1959). “Contribución a una política económica urbana.”. Económica, Vol. V(17-20): 245-250.[/vc_column_text]

    
    
    
      [vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657909042{margin-top: 10px !important;}"]
        <strong>Abstract</strong>
      [/vc_column_text]

      [vc_column_text]
        <p style="text-align: justify;">The author points out the necessity of a regulating plan for the city of Cordoba which considers the problems that have come forth as a result of the concentration of administrative and commercial activities, in addition to the settling of new industries and the increase of population, accentuating the lack of equilibrium between free spaces and builded spaces and the difficulties in public services and means of transport.</p>
      [/vc_column_text]

    
    
  [/vc_column]
[/vc_row]

```

***












## Título
Métodos de la ciencia regional aplicables a la planificación regional

## Idioma
Español

## Link a Artículo original
http://economica.econo.unlp.edu.ar/resumen-articulo.php?param=108&param2=555

## Artículo en HTML+Wordpress:
```
[vc_row] [vc_column]
    [vc_column_text]
      <span style="color: #800000;">Frederick Moore y  Walter Isard</span>
    [/vc_column_text]

    [vc_empty_space height="10px"]

    [vc_btn title="Descargar Documento" style="custom" custom_background="#821211" custom_text="#ffffff" size="xs" i_icon_fontawesome="fa fa-file-pdf-o" add_icon="true" link="url:http://economica.econo.unlp.edu.ar/20090408043127PM_Economica_53.pdf||target:%20_blank"]

    [vc_separator]

    [dt-space height="10"]

    
      [vc_column_text]
        <strong>Cita del artículo</strong>
      [/vc_column_text]

      [vc_column_text]Moore, Frederick y Walter Isard (1959). “Métodos de la ciencia regional aplicables a la planificación regional”. Económica, Vol. V(17-20): 251-260.[/vc_column_text]

    
    
    
      [vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657909042{margin-top: 10px !important;}"]
        <strong>Abstract</strong>
      [/vc_column_text]

      [vc_column_text]
        <p style="text-align: justify;">The authors, summarily expose some of the most promising methods in the matter of regional science, applicable to regional planning:a) Gravitation models, represented in mathematical terms, to be able to solve practical questions;b) Linear program, with which may be identified the series of products of different industries that can increase actual "per capita" income of a region to highest degree;c) Analysis of an industrial sector, of a technics, similar to that employed when comparative costs are analyzed to determine the location of one industry; to end with a more detailed commentary of the;d) Cost- product method, which though admits, as others, industrial relations, considers them from a different point of view, marking some extensions of it, able to face dynamic problems in the analysis of economic fluctuations and in projections of economic increase.</p>
      [/vc_column_text]

    
    
  [/vc_column]
[/vc_row]

```

***












## Título
Balances de pagos interregionales

## Idioma
Español

## Link a Artículo original
http://economica.econo.unlp.edu.ar/resumen-articulo.php?param=108&param2=556

## Artículo en HTML+Wordpress:
```
[vc_row] [vc_column]
    [vc_column_text]
      <span style="color: #800000;">Carlos Moyano Llerena</span>
    [/vc_column_text]

    [vc_empty_space height="10px"]

    [vc_btn title="Descargar Documento" style="custom" custom_background="#821211" custom_text="#ffffff" size="xs" i_icon_fontawesome="fa fa-file-pdf-o" add_icon="true" link="url:http://economica.econo.unlp.edu.ar/20090408043208PM_Economica_54.pdf||target:%20_blank"]

    [vc_separator]

    [dt-space height="10"]

    
      [vc_column_text]
        <strong>Cita del artículo</strong>
      [/vc_column_text]

      [vc_column_text]Moyano Llerena, Carlos (1959). “Balances de pagos interregionales”. Económica, Vol. V(17-20): 261-270.[/vc_column_text]

    
    
    
      [vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657909042{margin-top: 10px !important;}"]
        <strong>Abstract</strong>
      [/vc_column_text]

      [vc_column_text]
        <p style="text-align: justify;">The quantity of exports is a decisive factor of prosperity or tardiness of a region, since as well as in International trade, exportations determine the volume of importations; those regions that have their exportations promoted will be benefited to a great extent: there will be a greater input of Money, which, not only will allow more "importations", but will stimulate the internal economic activity of the region.On the contrary, its decrease will create a deficit in the balance of payments which will be balanced with money in circulation, which will diminish income and economic activity in general.The knowledge of the evolution of inter-regional balances of payments is a very valuable element of draw up an adequate economic policy.</p>
      [/vc_column_text]

    
    
  [/vc_column]
[/vc_row]

```

***












## Título
Preferencia espacial y división interregional del trabajo

## Idioma
Español

## Link a Artículo original
http://economica.econo.unlp.edu.ar/resumen-articulo.php?param=108&param2=557

## Artículo en HTML+Wordpress:
```
[vc_row] [vc_column]
    [vc_column_text]
      <span style="color: #800000;">Julio H. G. Olivera</span>
    [/vc_column_text]

    [vc_empty_space height="10px"]

    [vc_btn title="Descargar Documento" style="custom" custom_background="#821211" custom_text="#ffffff" size="xs" i_icon_fontawesome="fa fa-file-pdf-o" add_icon="true" link="url:http://economica.econo.unlp.edu.ar/20090408043251PM_Economica_55.pdf||target:%20_blank"]

    [vc_separator]

    [dt-space height="10"]

    
      [vc_column_text]
        <strong>Cita del artículo</strong>
      [/vc_column_text]

      [vc_column_text]Olivera, Julio H. G. (1959). “Preferencia espacial y división interregional del trabajo”. Económica, Vol. V(17-20): 271-277.[/vc_column_text]

    
    
    
      [vc_column_text css=".vc_custom_1509657909042{margin-top: 10px !important;}"]
        <strong>Abstract</strong>
      [/vc_column_text]

      [vc_column_text]
        <p style="text-align: justify;">It is suggested that analysis by means of "indifference functions" shall be extended to election among investment spaces; and the way in which that technique Could be developed to be applied to such problems is outlined in this work.The conditions of equilibrium, referred to the investor, are examined here. A necessary condition is that the proportional difference of the rates of return of resources be equal to the rate of space preference. If the structure of indifference functions renders the existence of a general equilibrium position possible, that equation must be verified for every investor simultaneously and, therefore, it defines a rate of space preference for the total of spaces considered.This market rate of space-preference permits to consider classic models of interregional trade, i.e., the "absolute costs" and the "comparative costs" models, as extremes of a continuum of situations.</p>
      [/vc_column_text]

    
    
  [/vc_column]
[/vc_row]

```

***










